..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt

..  _caching:

=======
Caching
=======

..  contents::
    :local:

Caching in TYPO3
================

TYPO3 uses multiple caching strategies to ensure fast content delivery.
Depending on the content a page contains, TYPO3 chooses the best caching
strategy for that use case.

For example, you might have a fully-cacheable page, a page that is at least
partially cacheable or a page that is completely dynamic. Dynamic elements in
TYPO3 are also known as :ref:`USER_INT <t3tsref:cobj-user-int>` or
:ref:`COA_INT <t3tsref:cobj-coa-int>` objects - as these are the matching
:ref:`Typoscript <t3tsref:start>` objects used to render non-cacheable content.

When visiting a TYPO3 web site, TYPO3 knows the following states:

*   first time hit, page has never been rendered ("cache miss")
*   consecutive hit, page has been rendered before ("cache hit")

In the first case, TYPO3 renders the complete page and writes cache entries as
configured. In the second case, TYPO3 fetches those entries from the cache and
delivers them to the user without re-triggering the rendering.

In that second case, either the page is fully cached and directly delivered from
the cache, or the page has non-cacheable elements on it. If a page has
non-cacheable elements, TYPO3 first fetches the cached part of the page and then
renders all dynamic parts.

..  note::
    The cache contains placeholders for dynamic elements to tell TYPO3 where to
    render dynamic parts.

..  hint::
    For developers: If you are developing a :ref:`plugin <frontend_plugin>`,
    think about your plugin's cache lifetime. Ideally, it can be fully cached,
    but if not, read the section about the
    :ref:`caching framework <caching-architecture>` to learn how to leverage
    TYPO3's caching mechanism to cache your plugin for however long you can -
    even 30 seconds might improve performance in some scenarios.

..  _chash:

Caching variants - or: What is a "cache hash"?
==============================================

TYPO3 ideally delivers fully cached pages for maximum performance. However, in
scenarios where the same page will deliver different content depending on URL
parameters, TYPO3 needs a possibility to identify these "variants" and cache
each of them differently. For example, if you have a news plugin and a detail
page, the detail page is different for every news entry.

To identify the variant, TYPO3 combines a set of parameters and generates a hash
value as identifier. These parameters include by default:

*   `id`: The current page ID
*   `type`: The current page type (`typeNum`)
*   `groupIds`: The user groups of the logged-in user (if no user is logged in:
    `0`, `-1` as default values)
*   `MP`: The :ref:`mount point <MountPoints>` identifier
*   `site`: The current :ref:`site <sitehandling>` and base URL
*   `staticRouteArguments`: Any route argument configured in the
    :ref:`routing configuration <routing>` and resolved in the current
    :ref:`request <typo3-request>`
*   `dynamicArguments`: Any "GET" parameters influencing the rendered page

Imagine the following URL :samp:`https://example.org/news/?tx_example_news[id]=123`
displaying the news with ID `123`. If TYPO3 would cache that page with that
parameter without any security mechanisms, it would open a potential denial of
service attack as an unlimited amount of cache entries could be generated by
adding arbitrary parameters. To avoid that, TYPO3 generates a so-called "cHash"
parameter, which is a hash that basically signs the valid parameters for that
request. So any parameter that validly influences the rendered page needs to be
part of that cHash.

With :ref:`routing <routing>` you can configure TYPO3 not to display the cHash
in your URLs in most cases. Routing adds an explicit mapping of incoming
readable URL slugs to internal parameter values. This both adds an additional
layer for validating slugs as well as reduces the parameters to a limited (and
predictable) set of values.

Various configuration options exist to configure the cHash behavior via
:ref:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['FE']['cacheHash'] <typo3ConfVars_fe_cacheHash>`
in the file :file:`config/system/settings.php` or :file:`config/system/additional.php`:

..  confval:: cachedParametersWhiteList

    **Only** the given parameters will be evaluated in the cHash calculation.
    Example: `tx_news_pi1[uid]`

    ..  attention::
        This option will lead to cache calculation being skipped for all
        parameters except the ones listed here. Caching of pages will not be
        influenced by other parameters beyond the initial caching anymore.

..  confval:: requireCacheHashPresenceParameters

    Configure parameters that require a cHash. If no cHash is given, but one of
    the parameters are set, then TYPO3 triggers the configured cHash error
    behavior

..  confval:: excludedParameters

    The given parameters will be ignored in the cHash calculation.
    Example: `L,tx_search_pi1[query]`

..  confval:: excludedParametersIfEmpty

    Configure parameters only being relevant for the cHash if there is an
    associated value available. Set excludeAllEmptyParameters to true to skip
    all empty parameters.

..  confval:: excludeAllEmptyParameters

    If true, all parameters relevant to cHash are only considered when they are
    not empty.

..  confval:: enforceValidation

    If this option is enabled, the same validation is used to calculate a cHash
    value as when a valid or invalid "cHash" parameter is given to a request,
    even when no cHash is given.

All properties can be configured with an array of values. Besides exact matches
(*equals*) it is possible to apply partial matches at the beginning of a
parameter (*startsWith*) or inline occurrences (*contains*).

URL parameter names are prefixed with the following indicators:

*   :php:`=` (*equals*): exact match, default behavior if not given
*   :php:`^` (*startsWith*): matching the beginning of a parameter name
*   :php:`~` (*contains*): matching any inline occurrence in a parameter name

These indicators can be used for all previously existing sub-properties
:php:`cachedParametersWhiteList`, :php:`excludedParameters`, :php:`excludedParametersIfEmpty`
and :php:`requireCacheHashPresenceParameters`.

Example (excerpt of `config/system/additional.php`)
===================================================

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: config/system/additional.php | typo3conf/system/additional.php

    $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['FE']['cacheHash'] = [
        'excludedParameters' => [
            'utm_source',
            'utm_medium',
        ],
        'excludedParametersIfEmpty' => [
            '^tx_my_plugin[aspects]',
            'tx_my_plugin[filter]',
        ],
    ];

For instance instead of having exclude items like

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: config/system/additional.php | typo3conf/system/additional.php

    'excludedParameters' => [
        'tx_my_plugin[data][uid]',
        'tx_my_plugin[data][category]',
        'tx_my_plugin[data][order]',
        'tx_my_plugin[data][origin]',
        // ...
    ],

partial matches allow to simplify the configuration and consider all items having
:php:`tx_my[data]` (or :php:`tx_my[data][` to be more specific) as prefix like

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: config/system/additional.php | typo3conf/system/additional.php

    'excludedParameters' => [
        '^tx_my_plugin[data][',
        // ...
    ],

Clearing/flushing and warming up caches
=======================================

TYPO3 provides different possibilities to clear all or specific caches.
Depending on the context, you might want to

*   clear the cache for a single page (for example, to make changes visible)
*   clear the frontend cache (for example, after templating changes)
*   clear all caches (for example, during development, when making TypoScript
    changes)
*   clear all caches incl. :ref:`dependency injection <DependencyInjection>`
    (mainly useful during development)

Clearing the cache for a single page is done by using the "clear cache button"
on that page in the backend (usually visualized with a "bolt" icon). Depending
on user rights this option is available for editors.

Clearing the frontend caches and all caches can be done via the system toolbar
in the TYPO3 backend. This option should only be available to administrators.
Clearing all caches can have a significant impact on the performance of the web
site and should be used sparingly on production systems.

The "fullest" option to clear all caches can be reached via the
:guilabel:`System Tools > Maintenance` section. In the development context when
new classes have been added to the system or in case of problems with the system
using this cache clearing option will clear all caches including compiled code
like the dependency injection container.

Clear cache command
-------------------

In addition to the GUI options explained above, caches can also be cleared
via a :ref:`CLI command <symfony-console-commands>`:

..  include:: /_includes/CliCacheFlush.rst.txt

Specific cache groups can be defined via the group option.
The usage is described as this:

..  code-block:: bash

    cache:flush [--group <all|system|di|pages|...>]

All available :ref:`cache groups <caching-architecture-core>` can be supplied as
option. The command defaults to flush all available cache groups as the
:guilabel:`System Tools > Maintenance` area does.

Extensions that register custom caches may listen to the :ref:`CacheFlushEvent`,
but usually the cache flush via cache manager groups will suffice to clear those
caches, too.

Cache warmup
------------

..  versionchanged:: 13.4.19
    Cache warm-up now fails if the PHP **major or minor** version used by the
    CLI differs from the version used by the web server.  
    (Both numbers are part of the cache key.)

    See `Important: #107649 - Dependency Injection cache is now PHP version dependant <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/changelog:important-107649-1760090777>`_
    for details.

It is possible to warmup TYPO3 caches using the command line.

The administrator can use the following
:ref:`CLI command <symfony-console-commands>`:

..  include:: /_includes/CliCacheWarmup.rst.txt

..  important::
    Cache warming will **not work correctly** if the PHP version used for the
    CLI context differs in the major or minor version from the PHP version used for
    the web context.

Specific cache groups can be defined via the group option.
The usage is described as this:

.. code-block:: bash

   cache:warmup [--group <all|system|di|pages|...>]

All available :ref:`cache groups <caching-architecture-core>` can be supplied as
option. The command defaults to warm all available cache groups.

Extensions that register custom caches are encouraged to implement cache warmers
via :ref:`CacheWarmupEvent`.

..  note::
    TYPO3 frontend caches will not be warmed by TYPO3 Core, such functionality
    could be added by third-party extensions with the help of
    :ref:`CacheWarmupEvent`.

Use case: deployment
--------------------

It is often required to clear caches during deployment of TYPO3 instance.
The integrator may decide to flush all caches or may alternatively flush
selected groups (for example, "pages"). It is common practice to clear *all*
caches during deployment of a TYPO3 instance update. This means that the first
request after a deployment usually takes a major amount of time and blocks other
requests due to cache-locks.

TYPO3 caches can be warmed during deployment in release preparatory steps in
symlink-based deployment/release procedures. This enables fast first requests
with all (or at least system) caches being prepared and warmed.

Caches are often filesystem relevant (file paths are calculated into cache
hashes), therefore cache warmup should only be performed on the the live system,
in the *final* folder of a new release, and ideally before switching
to that new release (via symlink switch).

..  warning::
    Caches that have been pre-created on the continuous integration server
    will likely be useless as cache hashes will not match (as the final file
    system path is relevant to the hash generation).

To summarize: Cache warmup is to be used during deployment, on the live system
server, inside the new release folder and before switching to the new release.

An example deployment could consist of:

*   Before the release:

    *   git-checkout/rsync your codebase to the continuous integration / build
        server
    *   :bash:`composer install` on the continuous integration / build server
    *   :bash:`vendor/bin/typo3 cache:warmup --group system` (*only* on the live
        system)

*   Change release symlink to the new release folder

*   After the release:

    *   :bash:`vendor/bin/typo3 cache:flush --group pages`

The conceptional idea is to warmup all file-related caches *before* (symlink)
switching to a new release and to *only* flush database and frontend (shared)
caches after the symlink switch. Database warmup could be implemented with
the help of the :ref:`CacheWarmupEvent` as an additionally functionality by
third-party extensions.

Note that file-related caches (summarized into the group "system") can safely be
cleared before doing a release switch, as it is recommended to keep file caches
per release. In other words, share :file:`var/session/`, :file:`var/log/`,
:file:`var/lock/` and :file:`var/charset/` between releases, but keep
:file:`var/cache/` be associated only with one release.


Caching framework
=================

TYPO3 contains a data caching framework which supports a wide variety of storage
solutions and options for different caching needs. Each cache can be configured
individually and can implement its own specific storage strategy.

The caching framework exists to help speeding up TYPO3 sites, especially
heavily loaded ones. It is possible to move all caches to a dedicated cache
server with specialized cache systems like the Redis key-value store (a so
called `NoSQL database`_).

..  _NoSQL database: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL

Major parts of the original caching framework were originally backported from
TYPO3 Flow.

..  toctree::
    :titlesonly:

    QuickStart/Index
    Configuration/Index
    Architecture/Index
    Frontends/Index
    Backends/Index
    Developer/Index
