:navigation-title: User Uploads

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  _multi-stage-environment-user-upload-management:

=====================================================
Synchronizing user-uploaded files across environments
=====================================================

TYPO3 sites commonly handle uploaded files such as images, videos, and
documents. These files are typically stored in directories like `fileadmin/`
or other storage locations defined through the
`File storage configuration <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:fal-administration-storages>`_.

While database records can be synchronized through exports or dumps,
synchronizing **user-uploaded files** across environments requires additional
considerations to keep **file references and media consistency intact**.

..  contents:: Table of contents

..  note::

    This chapter focuses on managing **file-based content**, such as uploads
    and media files. For database content, refer to
    :ref:`multi-stage-environment-database-management`.

    For an overview of environment workflows, see
    :ref:`multi-stage-environment-workflow`.

Synchronization methods covered in this chapter:

-   :ref:`Manual rsync copying <multi-stage-environment-file-sync-manual>`
-   :ref:`Automated deployment scripts <multi-stage-environment-file-sync-automation>`
-   :ref:`Filefill for fetching or generating media <multi-stage-environment-file-sync-filefill>`
-   :ref:`Shared storage with isolation recommendations <multi-stage-environment-file-sync-shared-storage>`

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-storage-locations:

Common file storage locations
=============================

By default, TYPO3 stores **user-managed files** in:

-   `fileadmin/` — typically used for editor-uploaded media and content files.
-   Custom storage locations defined in
    `File storage configuration <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:fal-administration-storages>`_.

These locations may contain:

-   Files uploaded by **backend users or editors** in the TYPO3 backend,
    such as images, PDFs, or videos used in page content.
-   Files uploaded by **website visitors**, for example through forms
    or application processes (uploads, form attachments).
-   **Automatically generated files**, such as scaled or transformed images,
    generated PDFs or cached previews.

..  important::

    **Static media assets** such as CSS files, JavaScript, icons, or static
    images **should not be placed in `fileadmin/`**.
    These assets belong in the `Resources/Public/` directory of your site
    package or TYPO3 extension. This ensures that versioned, developer-maintained
    resources are properly managed through your project’s codebase.

    Example: :file:`packages/site_package/Resources/Public/Images/logo.svg`

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-challenges:

Challenges in file management
=============================

File-based content can become large or sensitive, leading to challenges such as:

-   Storage size and synchronization effort.
-   Privacy and legal considerations (uploaded personal documents, storages
    with restricted access).
-   Dependency on matching files and database references.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-best-practices:

Best practices for file management
==================================

-   **Mirror file structures** between environments to avoid broken links.
-   **Exclude sensitive or unnecessary files** when synchronizing to
    non-production environments.
-   **Automate file synchronization** using deployment tools or scripts.
-   **Use symbolic links or mounts** if your infrastructure supports shared
    storage between environments.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-synchronization-methods:

File synchronization methods
============================

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-sync-manual:

Manual / rsync copying
----------------------

-   Copy files via `rsync`, FTP, or SSH between servers or environments.
-   Filter files based on file types or directories to reduce data transfer.
-   Exclude temporary or processed files that can be regenerated.

Example `rsync` command:

..  code-block:: bash

    rsync -avz \
        --exclude='*.bak' \
        --exclude='*/_processed_/' \
        --exclude='*/_temp_/' \
        user@source-server:/var/www/public/fileadmin/ \
        /var/www/public/fileadmin/

Explanation of exclusions:


-   `*.bak`: Skip backup or intermediate files, if present.
-   `*/_processed_/`: Skip processed files generated by TYPO3 FAL (resized or transformed images).
-   `*/_temp_/`: Skip all temporary folders, such as fileadmin/_temp_/
    or fileadmin/user_upload/_temp_/, used for transient files.

Temporary and processed files can typically be **regenerated by TYPO3**
and do **not need to be transferred** between environments.

See :ref:`handling processed files and metadata consistency
<multi-stage-environment-file-processed-files>` for important details
and trade-offs.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-sync-automation:

Automated deployment scripts
----------------------------

-   Integrate file copying into your CI/CD pipeline.
-   Use tools like `Deployer`, `GitLab CI`, or `GitHub Actions` with SSH or
    rsync tasks.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-sync-filefill:

Using filefill for media synchronization and placeholders
---------------------------------------------------------

The extension :composer:`ichhabrecht/filefill` provides a convenient solution
for handling media files in non-production environments.

It can be configured to:

-   **Fetch real files** (such as images or videos) from a live environment,
    if these are publicly accessible over HTTP.
-   **Generate placeholder files** when the real files are not available or
    should not be copied.

This allows developers to work with realistic file structures without needing
to transfer full media sets or sensitive files. It ensures that file references
exist on disk, preventing broken links in the TYPO3 backend or frontend.

However, filefill **only works with publicly accessible media files** like
images or videos. It **cannot synchronize non-media files**, such as:

-   Form configuration files
-   Protected private storage files
-   Arbitrary file types not publicly accessible

You typically want to enable filefill **only in development environments**.
This can be achieved using the `ApplicationContext` in your
:file:`config/system/additional.php`:

..  literalinclude:: _codesnippets/_filefill.php
    :caption: config/system/additional.php

For more information and configuration options, see the
`filefill documentation <https://github.com/IchHabRecht/filefill>`_.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-sync-shared-storage:

Shared storage
--------------

-   Use NFS, cloud storage (S3), or other shared storage solutions.
-   Mount the same file storage across environments if technically feasible.

..  note::

    Sharing file storage between production and non-production environments
    (such as staging or development) is **not recommended**.

    Changes made in staging or development could accidentally delete,
    overwrite, or expose files in production.

It is best practice to keep file storage **fully isolated** between
environments to ensure that testing and development activities do not
impact the live website.

If shared storage is unavoidable, make sure to:

-   Mount it **read-only** on non-production environments.
-   Provide **clear backend warnings** to prevent accidental changes.
-   Inform all users and developers about the risks.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-processed-files:

Handling processed files and metadata consistency
=================================================

TYPO3 generates processed files (such as scaled, cropped, or converted
images) and stores their metadata in the `sys_file_processedfile` table.

This creates a dependency between the **file system** and the **database**.

-   If you **skip synchronizing processed files** (for example, by excluding
    `_processed_` folders), TYPO3 will attempt to **regenerate them** when
    they are requested. This may result in **slower initial page loads**
    until all processed files are rebuilt.

-   If you **synchronize the `_processed_` folder**, you may transfer
    **large amounts of data**, including **stale or unnecessary files**
    that TYPO3 has not yet cleaned up.

TYPO3 uses the `sys_file_processedfile` table to **track processed files**.
If you copy **only the database** without matching files, TYPO3 may **reference
files that are no longer available**.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-processed-files-approaches:

Recommended approaches
----------------------

-   **Skip processed files** and **truncate the `sys_file_processedfile`
    table** to let TYPO3 regenerate them on demand:

    ..  code-block:: sql

        TRUNCATE TABLE sys_file_processedfile;

-   **Include processed files** if you want to avoid runtime regeneration,
    but consider cleaning up unnecessary files first to reduce data volume.

    You may use `rsync` or file system cleanup tools to remove
    outdated processed files before transferring them.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-processed-files-balancing:

Balancing performance, storage size, and deployment speed
--------------------------------------------------------

Decide based on your project’s priorities:

-   **For faster deployments** and **smaller storage**, skip processed
    files and truncate the table.
-   **For faster page loads** on first access, copy processed files along
    with the table, but expect to handle larger data volumes.

Make sure your team is aware of the trade-offs and apply a consistent
strategy across all environments.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-privacy:

Considerations for anonymization or exclusion of user managed files
===================================================================

-   Review file contents for personal or sensitive data.
-   Provide **reduced or dummy file sets** in non-production environments
    when appropriate.
-   Inform clients or editors if files are excluded or replaced.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-database-relations:

Relationship to database references
===================================

In TYPO3, **user-uploaded and editor-managed files** are typically
**referenced in the database** through the
`File Abstraction Layer (FAL) <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:fal-introduction>`_.

Common FAL-managed references include:

-   `sys_file_reference` records, which **reference the UID of a `sys_file`**
    record to connect files to content elements or other database records.
-   `sys_file` records, which store metadata about the actual file in
    the file system (path, size, MIME type).

**Best practice:**
Extensions and custom code should **always use FAL** to manage file relations.
**Direct file paths should not be stored** in custom database fields,
except in TYPO3’s `sys_file` table managed by FAL.

When synchronizing environments:

-   Ensure file references in `sys_file_reference` match existing UIDs in `sys_file`.
-   Ensure `sys_file` records ideally describe existing files on disk,
    **especially in production environments**.
-   In **development or staging**, it is often acceptable to have **incomplete
    file presence**, provided tools like **filefill** or **placeholders**
    are used to simulate missing files.
-   Avoid broken references by keeping **FAL metadata and file storage
    reasonably aligned** based on the environment's purpose.
-   Verify that **no direct file paths are hardcoded or stored in custom tables**.

Broken or inconsistent references may result in **missing media** in the
frontend or backend and may require **manual repair, re-indexing, or cleanup**.

..  _multi-stage-environment-file-summary:

Best practices summary
======================

-   Synchronize necessary files alongside database content.
-   Exclude or anonymize sensitive or large files when appropriate.
-   Automate file handling in your deployment processes.
-   Document your project's file synchronization strategy.

..  seealso::

    -   :ref:`Multi-stage environment workflow <multi-stage-environment-workflow>`
    -   :ref:`Synchronizing database content <multi-stage-environment-database-management>`
    -   :ref:`Configuring environments <environment-configuration>`
