.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt

Role definition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Typically, a software development company or web design agency
develops the initial TYPO3 website for the client. After the delivery,
approval and training, the client is able to edit the content and
takes the role of an editor. All technical administration, maintenance
and update tasks often stay at the developer as the provider of the
system. This may vary depending on the relation and contracts between
developer and client of course.

Editors are predominantly responsible for the content of the website.
They log in to the backend of TYPO3 (the administration interface)
using their username and password. Editors add, update and remove
pages as well as content on pages. They upload files such as images or
PDF documents, create internal and external links and add/edit
multimedia elements. The terminology "content" applies to all editable
texts, images, tables, lists, possibly forms, etc. Editors sometimes
translate existing content into different languages and prepare and/or
publish news.

Depending on the complexity and setup of the website, editors possibly
work in specific "workspaces" (e.g. a draft workspace) with or without
the option to publish the changes to the "live" site. It is not
required for an editor to see the entire page tree and some areas of
the website are often not accessible and not writable for editors.

Advanced tasks of editors are for example the compilation and
publishing of newsletters, the maintenance of frontend user records
and/or export of data (e.g. online shop orders).

Editors usually do not change the layout of the website, they do not
set up the system, new backend user accounts, new site functionality
(for example, they do not install, update or remove extensions), they
do not need to have programming, database or HTML knowledge and they
do not configure the TYPO3 instance by changing TypoScript code or templates.

